Coding standards in R are really important
becasue they help you, make your code
readable and allow you and other people to
understand what's going on in your code.
Now, of course, just like it is with any
other, style whether it comes, when you,
you know, whether
it's your clothing or whatever it is, it's
difficult
to get everyone to agree on one set of
ideas.
But I think there are a couple of very
basic, kind
of minimal standards that are important
when you're coding in R.
Alright, so I'm just going to talk a
little bit about some of
the coding standards, that I think are
important to, when you're writing
R code, and I think will help make your
code more readable
and more usable by others if that's what
you're trying to, to achieve.
So, the first principle that I think is
very
important in pretty much any programming
language, not just
R, is that you should always write your
code
using a text editor and save as a text
file.
Okay, so, a text
file is a kind of basic standard.
It usually doesn't have any sort of
formatting or any
sort of, kind of special, appearance, it's
just text, right?
And usually, typically, typically it's
going to be
ASCII text, but if you're, on, in places
outside the US or the UK using non-English
languages there may be other standard text
formats.
But the basic idea is that a text format,
can be read by pretty much any
basic editing program.
These days, you know, when you're writing
something there's a
lot different of tools that you can use to
write.
If you're writing a book, or or a webpage
or something like that, there's
all kinds of different tools that you can
use to write, to write those things.
But you're, when you're writing code, you
should always try to
use a text editor, because that's like
kind of like the, the
kind of least common denominator, and it
makes it so that
everyone will be able to access your code
and improve upon it.
The second principle is, which is very
important for readability, is to indent
your code.
So indenting is something that's often
hotly debated in lots of mailing lists
and other types of discussion groups in
terms of how much indenting is
appropriate.
Now I'm not going to talk about that
although I do have some recommendations.
But I think the most important thing
is that you understand why indenting is
important.
So indenting is the idea that different
blocks of code
should be spaced over to the right a
little bit more
than other blocks of code so you can see
kind of how the
control flow how the flow of the program
goes based on the indenting alone.
So coupled with indenting, is the third
principle which I think
is very simple which is, limit the width
of your code.
So you have indenting it's possible to
kind of
indent off to the right forever so you
need
to limit on the right hand side how wide
your code is going to be and usually this
is
kind of determined by the number of
columns of text.
And so one possibility is you limit your
text to about 80 columns of
text and then and so that your, the width
of your code never exceeds that.
So, let's take a look for, at a quick
example here.
So here you can see I've got R Studio
open, here
with a simple code file with some R code
in it.
And, first of all, let me just mention
that
the editor in R Studio is a text editor.
So it
will always save the R files that you
write as text format files.
So, so we've already got that kind of
handled.
But you can see the indenting scheme here
is equal to one space.
So every indent is one space.
And you can see that all the code is
kind of mashed together here on the left
hand side.
It's difficult to tell kind of where the
if blocks are.
Where the else blocks are.
Where does the function kind of end and
begin?
And so the indenting scheme kind of makes
the code not
very readable in this case.
So we can change the indenting in R
Studio.
If we just go up to the Preferences menu
here.
And go to Code Editing.
And let me just change it to four.
And you can see that the column, the
margin column is set to
80 characters, so it will show you the
margin when you've reached 80 characters.
And so I'm going to select all here with
Cmd+A, and then Cmd+I to indent it.
So now you can see that the
indenting is a little bit nicer now.
You can see, kind of, where the function
begins and ends, you can see where the
if blocks start and end, and the, kind
of, structure of the program is much more
obvious.
So, I'm going to change this one more time
though and my, because my personal
preference for indenting is to use eight
spaces,
so I'm going to change this to eight.
Hit OK, and select all.
Cmd+I.
And now you can see,
I prefer the eight spaces just because it
really makes the structure of the code
very obvious.
And the spacing is nice and clear.
And it makes the code very readable in
general.
So you can see that indenting is very
important.
And the biggest problem you might have is,
with the, with, with too little indenting.
If you don't indent at all or if you only
use
a very small amount the code becomes
kind of very mashed together.
So I recommend at least four
spaces for an indent and I'm pref, I
prefer, you know, eight spaces for an
indent, just
because it makes the code much more
readable
and spaces it out much nice, much more
nicely.
One of the advantages of having something
like an
eight space indent, is coupled with an 80
character margin
on the right hand side, is that it forces
you
to think about your code in a slightly
different way.
So for example, if you have eight space
indents, if you're going to have a
for-loop, nested within
another for-loop within another for-loop,
every time you nest another
for-loop, for example, you have to indent
over eight spaces.
And by the time you get to maybe your
fourth nested for-loop you're
pretty much hitting the right hand column
at the 80 column margin, right?
And so the nice thing about the eight
space
indent, coupled with the 80 column margin,
is that it
prevents you from kind of writing very
basic, making very
kind of fundamental, kind of mistakes
with, with code readability.
So, for example, with an eight space
indent and 80 column
margin, you might not be able to do
feasibly more than
two nested for loops, and, but I think
that's really the,
kind of, the boundary of what is readable
in terms of code.
Typically except for some special cases, a
three, you
know, a three nested or four nested four
loop is
difficult to read, and it's probably
better off, you
know, splitting off into separate
functions or something like that.
So a good indenting policy not only
makes the code more readable, but it
actually can force you
to think about writing your code in a
slightly different way.
And so that's a really nice advantage of,
of having a logical
indenting policy with, coupled with a, you
know, a right-hand side restriction.
Alright.
So the last thing I want to talk about is
to limit the length of your functions.
Alright so, functions in R can, can
theoretically go on for quite
a long time and of course just like in any
other language but
just like in any other language I think
that the, the logical thing
to do with a function is limit it to
kind of one basic activity.
So for example, if you're function's named
read the data.
Then your function should simply read the
data, it should not read
the data, process it, fit a model, and
then print some output, alright?
So you should, the logical kind of steps
like
that, should, should probably be spit,
split, into separate functions.
There are a couple of advantages to doing
this.
First of all, it's nice to be able to
have a function written on a single page
of code,
so you don't have to scroll endlessly to
see,
you know, where all the code for this
function goes.
If you could put all the function, the
entire function on like one screen of the
editor, then you can look at the whole
function and see what it does all at once.
Another advantage of splitting up your
code into logical sections,
to logical functions, is that if you use
functions like traceback,
or the profiler, or the debugger, these
often tell you, you know,
where in the function call stack you are
when a problem occurs.
And if you have multiple functions that
are all logically divided
in to separate pieces then when a bug
occurs and you know
that it occurs in a certain type of
function or a certain
function then you know kind of where to go
fix things, right?
So if you have, but if just have a single
function that just goes
on forever and a bug occurs then the only
thing that the debugger or
the traceback or the profiler can tell you
is that there's a problem in this one
function.
But it, it doesn't, it, it's difficult to
tell you where exactly the problem occurs.
So splitting up your functions has a
secondary benefit, which
is that it can help you in debugging and
profiling.
So limiting the size of your functions is
very useful for readability and for, kind
of, debugging.
Of course, it's easy to go overboard and
having, you know, a hundred different
three-line functions.
So that's not really what
you want to do.
So you just want to make it so that the,
the separation of different functions
into, is logical, and that each function
kind of does, does one thing in
particular.
So those are my basic guidelines for
writing code in R.
There are, of course, many other things
that you might be able to think about.
But then we start bordering into areas
that
we might, we might kind of disagree on.
And so I'm not going to talk about too
much more
in terms of coding standards, but the
basic ideas are always
use a text editor, always indent your
code, I'd say at least four spaces.
Limit on the right hand side how, how wide
your code can be.
And and always limit the size of your
functions, so that you
can, so that they're, kind of grouped into
logical pieces of your program.
So with those four things, I think you'll,
your, your code will be much more
readable.
It'll be readable to you, it'll be
readable to others, and it'll make kind
of writing R code much more useful to
everyone.